We have a problem. Derren Brown’s new stage show Infamous is starting in two days and I’m here to interview him about it.
But he won’t leak so much as one little detail beyond the fact that it’s a more stripped-down production than his recent Svengali and Enigma stage shows: ‘Like a musician doing an acoustic set,’ he says. 
‘Sorry, but no one but me and Andy can know what’s in the show,’ he says. All six of his shows have been  co-written by fellow magician Andy Nyman and  everything has stayed remarkably secret.
‘I find there’s very little appetite for spoiling them,’ he says, which is all very well, but what are we going to talk about for the next hour? 
Well, there’s always rumour. With Brown, there always is. Two rival newspapers have been going around claiming his next stunt will be to make a straight man gay. 
‘Total rubbish,’ says Brown. He knows you can’t change someone’s sexuality by mind-power. How? Because he tried it 20 years ago. On himself.
Born in 1971 and an only child until the age of nine, Brown grew up in south London and attended the fee-paying Whitgift School in Croydon, where his father was a swimming instructor. Brown was not sporty and didn’t have an easy time.
‘I was just generally uncool, part of a classical music-oriented set sometimes called “the poof gang”,’ he says. 

He’d inherited his artistic side from his mother, who was a model. His relationship with his father was ‘tough and unhealthy, the classic thing. 
Not getting on with my father, not fitting in with the boys at school: at that age you don’t know whether that happens because you’re gay, or if you’re gay because of them,’ he says.
‘For years I was rather embarrassed about it, hoping it would pass, and was basically celibate.’
By the time he went to read law at Bristol University (where he won an award for ballroom dancing), he felt his sexuality had become a ‘dark cloud’ and tried to do something about it.
‘I would have given anything to change it,’ he says. ‘I came across a Christian movement that tries to “heal” homosexuality. The message was “if you don’t want to be gay, there’s a way out”, which is not inherently homophobic. I read the books and attended the meetings.’ 
This happened at a crucial time in Brown’s development. Although a self-confessed exam cheat and prolific shoplifter (until caught with an unpaid-for Luther Vandross cassette in Harrods), for most of his life he’d considered himself a Christian. 
But he was about to come to one of life’s crossroads.
‘I was a proper believer,’ he says. ‘I’d been to a Sunday-school class when I was five and maintained my beliefs into uni. With the self-assurance of the truly naive, I would sit down and tell my friends why they should be Christians. But it was early on at university that I got into hypnosis.’
Brown was initially drawn to it and card tricks as a fraudulent route to impressing people.
‘Magicians tend to be kids with no social confidence,’ he says.
‘You rely on the tricks, hide behind the cards as a way to social acceptance. That was me for many years.’ 
But if Brown thought the Christian Union would be charmed by his tricks, he was in for a shock. 
‘I immediately got this backlash of anger from them,’ he says. ‘I had people exorcising me during my shows. They really attacked me.
‘I started to see there was a capacity for fear and misunderstanding in the church. Learning hypnosis taught me how suggestion works and studying magic gave me an understanding of how charlatans work. 
'So suddenly, when I’d hear my minister saying tarot cards were the work of the devil, I said to myself: “Well, they’re not. There’s no magic happening. I know it isn’t”. So, bit by bit, I began disassembling my religious beliefs.’ 
What about ‘healing’ his homosexuality?
‘The problem was that it wasn’t working for anybody!’ he says. ‘The people who said, “Yes, I’m cured” would then say, “Of course, I still have homosexual yearnings but the Lord helps me keep them pressed down.” I thought, “Well, that’s not going to do me any good.”’
From this point, Brown – who now has a long-term boyfriend –  seems to have blossomed. He threw himself into magic, staying up all night to learn tricks, reading book after book on psychology, stagecraft and showmanship and marching around dressed, in his words, as a ‘bad Spandau Ballet gay leisure pirate’.
‘I had a long cloak, big blousy shirt, boots, harem pants, a drop earring and long hair tied back in a big velvet bow,’ he says.
‘It was ridiculously self-aggrandising. I’ve still got the cape, because I always thought I’d one day get a jewel-topped cane to go with it but as I started performing my need for attention was channelled into something more appropriate.’
Brown decided magic, not law was his calling – to no objection from his parents. He was quite happy doing card tricks in Bristol restaurants when a TV producer called, hoping to launch him as Britain’s answer to the then little-known street magician David Blaine.